Objective: To observe the effect of early acupoint electrical stimulation on the decline of lower limbs muscle strength in patients with intensive care unit-acquired weakness (ICU-AW) caused by septic shock.

Methods: A total of 58 patients with ICU-AW caused by septic shock were randomly divided into an observation group (28 cases, 1 case dropped off ) and a control group (30 cases, 2 cases dropped off ). Patients in both groups received routine basic treatment. In the observation group, acupoint electric stimulation therapy was added at Huantiao (GB 30), Futu (ST 32), Zusanli (ST 36), Xuanzhong (GB 39) and Taichong (LR 3). Unilateral point with electrodes were applied, the SDZ-Ⅱ electronic instrument (discontinuous wave, frequency in 2 Hz, strength in 5 mA) was connected and changed to the other side after 30 min of unilateral treatment.The treatment was given 2 times daily, continued for 7 d or until the medical research council (MRC) score being 54 points or more. The changes of lower limb muscle strength MRC score, modified Rankin scale (MRS) score, bilateral quadriceps thickness and gastrocnemius pinnate angle of both groups were observed before treatment and on discharge. The time of admission to ICU, time of hospitalization, mortality during hospitalization, and mortality 28 d after discharge were compared between the two groups. The MRS scores of the two groups were followed up 28 d after discharge.

Results: The MRC scores of lower limb muscle strength in the two groups on discharge were higher than those before treatment (P<0.05), and the MRS scores on discharge and 28 d after discharge in the two groups were lower than those before treatment (P<0.05). The MRC scores of lower limb muscle strength on discharge in the observation group were higher than thoes in the control group (P<0.05), and the MRS scores on discharge and 28 d after discharge in the observation group were lower than those in the control group (P<0.05). On discharge, bilateral quadriceps thickness and gastrocnemius pinnate angle in the two groups were increased compared with those before treatment (P<0.05), and thoese in the observation group was higher than the control group (P<0.05). There was no significant difference between the two groups in the time of admission to ICU, time of hospitalization, mortality during hospitalization, and mortality 28 d after discharge (P>0.05).

Conclusion: Early acupoint electrical stimulation can improve the lower extremity muscle decline in patients with ICU-AW caused by septic shock.