Objective: To compare the clinical effect of the combined treatment of acupuncture, moxibustion, Chinese herbal medicine and western medication and simple western medication on polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) of kidney deficiency and blood stagnation pattern and explore the effect on endometrial receptivity and the expression of serum homeobox gene A10 (HOXA10).

Methods: A total of 60 patients with PCOS of kidney deficiency and blood stagnation pattern were randomized into a combined treatment group and a western medication group, 30 cases in each one. In the western medication group, on the fifth day of menstruation, clomiphene citrate tablets were taken orally, 50 mg each time, once daily, consecutively for 5 days. On the day when the follicle diameter was ≥ 18 mm, chorionic gonadotrophin for muscular injection, a dose of 10 000 U was given. Before sleep, the aspirin enteric-coated tablets were taken orally, 50 mg (except during menstruation). In the combined treatment group, on the base of the treatment as the western medication group, acupuncture and moxibustion were adopted and the Chinese herbal for tonifying the kidney and activating blood circulation was taken orally. The acupoints were Guanyuan (CV 4), Qihai (CV 6), Zusanli (ST 36), Sanyinjiao (SP 6), Zigong (EX-CA 1), etc. Acupuncture was remained for 30 min each time, once every two days and discontinued during menstruation. Chinese herbal was given from the 3rd day of menstruation till the onset of the next menstruation, one dose each day. After consecutive treatment for 3 menstrual cycles in the two groups, the real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) method was adopted to determine the expression of serum HOXA10 before and after treatment in the patients of the two groups. The endometrial thickness at ovulatory phase, uterine arterial flow 7 days after ovulation [including uterine arterial pulsatility index (PI), resistance index (RI), peak systolic velocity (PSV)/end diastolic velocity (EDV), meaning S/D], pregnancy rate and the score of Chinese medicine symptoms before and after treatment were compared in the patients between the two groups.

Results: ① After treatment, the expression of serum HOXA10 was higher than that before treatment in the patients of the two groups (P<0.01). The increase range in the combined treatment group was larger than the western medication group (P<0.01). ② After treatment, the endometrial thickness at the ovulatory phase was increased in the patients of the two groups (P<0.01). The increase range of the endometrial thickness in the combined treatment group was larger than the western medication group (P<0.01). ③ The pregnancy rate was 46.7% (14/30) in the combined treatment group, higher than 26.7% (8/30) in the western medication group (P<0.05). ④ After treatment, the bilateral uterine arterial PI, RI and S/D values, as well as TCM symptom score were all lower than those before treatment in the patients of the two groups (P<0.01). The decrease range of each index in the combined treatment group was greater than the western medication group (P<0.01, P<0.05).

Conclusion: The combined treatment with acupuncture, moxibustion and medication effectively improves endometrial receptivity and uterine arterial flow in the patients with PCOS of kidney deficiency and blood stagnation pattern and increases pregnancy rate. The therapeutic effect is better than the simple western medication and its mechanism is probably related to the regulation of serum HOXA10 expression.