Defining a maternal plane of nutrition during gestation is pivotal for improving sow productivity and the cost-effectiveness of feeding. The benefits of increasing the amount of feed during late gestation have been controversial. The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of different planes of nutrition during gestation on reproductive performance of hyperprolific sows and pre-weaning litter performance. One hundred and thirty-five gestating sows were randomly assigned to one of three planes of nutrition throughout parities three and four (P4), as follows: Req - plane designed to meet requirements of prolific sows (2.3 kg per day from day 1 to 21; 1.8 kg per day from day 22 to 75; 2.3 kg per day from day 76 to farrowing); Bump - plane designed as the Req, with increased feed intake during late gestation (3.0 kg per day from day 91 to farrowing); and Maintenance - plane designed to closely meet maintenance requirements of sows (1.8 kg per day from day 1 to farrowing). All treatments were fed the same gestation diet (2.50MCal NE/kg; 0.67% SID Lysine; 15.17% CP). Sow biometrical parameters at farrowing and at weaning, and litter characteristics were recorded. Also, blood samples were collected for pre- and post-prandial serum glucose and plasma insulin, as well as triglycerides, calcium, and phosphorus analyses. Culling, stratified by cause, and retention rates were recorded in all treatments for each parity. Over two parities, Bump sows had higher weight gain and, at P4, had a higher number of piglets born alive (P < 0.05). Bump sows lost more weight between the end of gestation and weaning over two parities (P < 0.05). Maintenance sows showed reduced body condition score with a higher percentage of piglets removed throughout lactation (due to inappetence and inability to reach the udder) at P4 (P = 0.03). Pre- and post-prandial glucose levels were higher in Bump sows, as well as post-prandial insulin and phosphorus levels at P4 (P < 0.05). Bump sows also showed increased plasma triglycerides compared to the other treatments (P = 0.03). Retention rate was reduced in Maintenance compared to Bump and Req sows at parity 5 (P = 0.02). Taken together, our results indicate that higher feed intake allowance during late gestation may improve the sow's nutritional status triggering positive results on litter size of hyperprolific sows (e.g., more than 17 total born). However, body condition score must be carefully evaluated to prevent excessive weight gain during successive parities.