Purpose of the research: This pilot study reports the feasibility of a future randomized controlled trial (RCT) investigating the effect of supported self-management through low-intensity psychological intervention in patients with peripheral arterial disease (PAD) resulting in claudication. The study protocol, measurement instrument, data collection, and analysis were evaluated. Clinical outcome measures include depression and anxiety scores, smoking cessation, activity (step count), weight, and quality of life. Both Quantitative and Qualitative data were collected to evaluate participant experience and the clinical impact of a supported self-management intervention delivered in a routine clinical setting.

Methods: Participants received an initial one to one assessment with a health psychologist. Demographic data and baseline clinical outcome measures were recorded. These included Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale score (HADS), health-related quality of life questionnaire (EQ-5D-3 L), number of cigarettes smoked daily, weight/BMI, and daily step count. Participants each received an activity tracker to record daily step count and were followed up weekly to provide psychological input, including goal setting, overcoming barriers, and preventing relapse. Quantitative data collection was scheduled at baseline, 3 and 6 months (final follow-up). At the final follow-up, participants provided qualitative feedback reflecting upon their experience of the intervention and its impact. Descriptive statistical analysis and simple paired samples t-test were employed in data evaluation.

Results: The sample size was small (n = 30). Twenty-three participants were followed up to 6 months. Depression scores improved with statistical significance from baseline to 6-month follow-up. Eight participants stopped smoking (47% reduction); a further 9 greatly reduced their intake. A borderline statistically significant increase of daily step count was achieved between baseline and 6-month follow-up. In addition, positive weight loss trends were observed in a predominantly obese or overweight cohort. The qualitative feedback highlighted participants understood and embraced the information delivered regarding the importance of health behavior change. Participants were able to link tailored action plans with what mattered to them with the help of the Health Psychologist.

Conclusion: This study embraces the contemporary ideology of enabling self-management of long-term conditions to improve clinical outcomes. As a pilot study, we have shown that an expanded, randomized controlled trial is both safe and feasible. A positive trend in clinical outcomes suggests this patient group may benefit from supported self-management through low-intensity psychological intervention, where other forms of early intervention have historically faltered.