Background: Non-invasive ventilation is widely used now a days in patients with hypercapnic respiratory failure. Non-invasive ventilation can be used in Intensive Care Unit setting and wards provided trained staff is there to monitor.

Methods: This was a prospective observational study of 100 adult patients who were admitted with hypercapnic respiratory failure. Demographic information such as Age, Sex were recorded. Clinical parameters like Respiratory Rate, Heart Rate, Oxygen saturation and Arterial Blood Gas variables like pH, PaCO2, HCO3 were measured at the time of admission and at 1st hour, 4 hours and 24 hours after start of non-invasive ventilation. Outcome was recorded as success and failure with Non invasive ventilation.

Results: Out of 100 patients, 76 (76%) managed successfully with non-invasive ventilation and 24 patients (24%) needed intubation and invasive mechanical ventilation in this study. Majority of patients (76%) were with clinical diagnosis of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease. Respiratory Rate and Heart Rate were significantly lower and showed significant improvement at 1st hour, 4 hours and 24 hours in patients who successfully improved with Non invasive ventilation. Oxygen saturation was found to be significantly higher among patients successfully managed with Non invasive ventilation (84.35 ± 8.55 vs 76.87 ± 7.33) as compared to patients who required intubation. pH was found to be significantly higher (7.28 ± 0.06 vs 7.23 ± 0.05) in patients showing good response to Non invasive ventilation and improvement in pH at 1st hour, 4 hours and 24 hours was observed in patients successfully managed with Non invasive ventilation. PaCO2 level was found to be significantly lower and significant improvement in PaCO2 at 1st hour, 4 hours and 24 hours was seen in patients with Non invasive ventilation success.

Conclusion: Improvement in clinical parameters like respiratory rate, heart rate, Oxygen saturation and improvement in ABG variables like pH, PaCO2 after 1st and 4 hours of start of Non invasive ventilation and maintaining the improvement at 24 hours are predictors of success of non-invasive ventilation in hypercapnic patients.