Background: Pilates has growing appeal to pregnant women, as a form of exercise and relaxation. It is purported to benefit lumbo-pelvic stability, as well as motor control, strength and endurance. Some suggest that modified Pilates exercises may assist low risk pregnant women to enjoy a healthier pregnancy and prepare for the physical demands of labour and birth. The feasibility and safety of Pilates during pregnancy is poorly understood. We describe the protocol for a feasibility study designed to compare a midwife-led 6-week community-based Pilates intervention with standard antenatal care.

Methods: A convenience sample of 30 low-risk pregnant women will be recruited from private obstetric clinics in Melbourne, Australia. Participants shall be randomly allocated to a six-week, 1-h weekly Pilates exercises group session or to usual care. The Pilates exercise class will have a warm-up phase, Pilates exercises, breathing exercises, and a cool down phase. Exercises have been designed to prepare for active birth. The primary outcome will be feasibility of implementation, determined by recruitment, retention, adherence and safety. Secondary outcomes include women's health (quality of life, pain, mobility for daily activities, lower extremity performance, abdominal separation, continence) and labour and birth outcomes (duration of first stage and second stage labour, analgesia used, mode of birth). Validated questionnaires will include the Quality of life 12-item short form survey; Pregnancy Mobility Index, and International Consultation on Incontinence Questionnaire. Lower extremity performance and abdominal separation will also be measured.

Discussion: This trial will provide preliminary data regarding the feasibility and safety of Pilates exercise in healthy pregnant women. It will also provide preliminary outcome data used to inform the design of a future large scale, multi-centre RCT.

Trial registration: This clinical trial has been registered with the Australian and New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry 2016 (ACTRN12616000809437).