Objective: To observe the clinical effect on spinal low back pain (SLBP) in Air Force crew treated with novel thumbtack needling therapy and to analyze the relevant factors of the therapeutic effect.

Methods: A total of 120 Air Force crew with SLBP were randomized into a thumbtack needling group (40 cases), an external treatment group (40 cases, 1 case dropped off ) and a combined treatment group (40 cases, 1 case dropped off ). In the thumbtack needling group, the thumbtack needling therapy was adopted. The novel thumbtack needles were inserted at the lower No.6 region of the wrist-ankle acupuncture, Yaotongdian (EX-UE 7), Yaoyangguan (GV 3), etc. Each point was pressed and kneaded for 1 min each time, 3 or 4 times a day. The treatment for 3 days was taken as one course. At the interval of 2 days, 3 courses were required totally. In the external treatment group, shangshi zhitong plaster was compressed on the center of the tender site in the lumbar region, once daily, consecutively for 6 days as one course. At an interval of 1 day, 2 courses were required totally. In the combined treatment group, the treatments in the thumbtack needling group and the external treatment group were used in combination. Before and after treatment, McGill score and the score of Oswestry dysfunction index (ODI) were compared in the patients among the three groups. The average EMG (AEMG) and the mean power frequency (MPF) were analyzed by using JE-TB0810 electromyography (EMG) acquisition system to evaluate the erector spinae tension in the patients before and after treatment. The clinical effect was observed in the patient of each group and the safety was evaluated. Logistic analysis was performed on the relevant factors of therapeutic effect in the patients.

Results: Compared with the values before treatment, McGill scores and ODI scores were reduced (P<0.05), and AEMG and MPF increased in the patients of each group after treatment (P<0.05). After treatment, McGill scores and ODI scores in the thumbtack needling group and the combined treatment group were lower than those in the external treatment group (P<0.05), and AEMG and MPF were higher than the external treatment group (P<0.05). The total effective rates were 87.5% (35/40) and 87.2% (34/39) in the thumbtack needling group and the combined treatment group respectively and were higher than 64.1% (25/39) in the external treatment group (P<0.05). The incidence of the adverse reaction in the combined treatment group was higher than the other two groups (P<0.05). The weekly exercise frequency was the independent factor of the therapeutic effect (OR =12.166, P<0.001).

Conclusion: The thumbtack needling therapy is significantly effective on spinal low back pain in Air Force crew and is of the safety. Hence, this therapy is applicable to be promoted in the primary care army hospital.

