Objective: To compare the clinical therapeutic effect and safety on insomnia among three acupuncture combinations, named Tongdu Tiaowei (promoting the circulation of the governor vessel and regulating the defensive system), Tongdu Yangxin (promoting the circulation of the governor vessel and nourishing the heart) and Tongdu Tiaozang (promoting the circulation of the governor vessel and regulating zang functions).

Methods: A total of 90 patients with insomnia were randomized into a Tongdu Tiaowei group (30 cases, 1 case dropped off ), a Tongdu Yangxin group (30 cases, 2 cases dropped off ) and a Tongdu Tiaozang group (30 cases, 1 case dropped off ). Besides electroacupuncture (EA) applied to Baihui (GV 20) and Yintang (GV 29) in all of the three groups, acupuncture was added at Shenmai (BL 62) and Zhaohai (KI 6), Shenmen (HT 7) and Sanyinjiao (SP 6) as well as back-shu points of five zang organs [Feishu (BL 13), Xinshu (BL 15), Ganshu (BL 18), Pishu (BL 20) and Shenshu (BL 23)] in the Tongdu Tiaowei group, the Tongdu Yangxin group and the Tongdu Tiaozang group successively. The treatment was given once every two days, 3 times weekly, consecutively for 4 weeks. The score of Pittsburgh sleep quality index (PSQI) before and after treatment was observed, the therapeutic effect was evaluated and the adverse reactions were recorded in the patients of each group.

Results: After treatment, the score of each of 6 factors, named sleep quality, sleep latency, sleep time, sleep efficiency, sleep disturbance and daytime dysfunction, as well as the total score of PSQI scale were all reduced as compared with the scores before treatment in the patients of each group (P<0.05). After treatment, the scores of sleep latency and daytime dysfunction in the Tongdu Tiaowei group were lower than the other two groups (P<0.05). The score of sleep time in the Tongdu Yangxin group was lower than the other two groups (P<0.05) and the score of sleep quality in the Tongdu Tiaozang group was lower than the other two groups (P<0.05). After treatment, the total effective rates were 96.6% (28/29), 96.4% (27/28) and 96.6% (28/29) in the Tongdu Tiaowei group, the Tongdu Yangxin group and the Tongdu Tiaozang group successively, without significant difference in comparison among the three groups (P>0.05). During treatment, 1 case of mild adverse reaction occurred in each group.

Conclusion: All of the three acupuncture combinations, named Tongdu Tiaowei, Tongdu Yangxin and Tongdu Tiaozang can effectively improve the sleep conditions in the patients with insomnia and are satisfactory in safety. The acupuncture combinations of Tongdu Tiaowei has the potential advantage in shortening sleep latency and relieving daytime dysfunction, the combinations of Tongdu Yangxin has the potential advantage in increasing sleep time and the combinations of Tongdu Tiaozang has the potential advantage in improving sleep quality.