Background: Patients with severe burns often show systemic coagulation changes in the early stage and even develop extensive coagulopathy. Previous studies have confirmed that soluble TREM-like transcript-1 (sTLT-1) mediates a novel mechanism of haemostasis and thrombosis in inflammatory vascular injury. At present, the role of sTLT-1 in patients with severe burns is not well known.

Objective: To investigate the early association between sTLT-1 levels and markers of burn severity, coagulation disorders, endothelial permeability, shock and prognosis in patients with severe burns.

Methods: A prospective, observational study was conducted with 60 severe burn patients (divided into a death group and a survival group according to 30-day prognosis) admitted to our hospital. Twenty-eight healthy volunteers were recruited as the control group. Blood components at 48 h after burn were analysed for sTLT-1 and biomarkers reflecting platelet activation, shock, endothelial glycocalyx damage, capillary leakage, haemostasis, fibrinolytic activity, natural anticoagulation and blood cells. We compared the three groups, analysed the correlation between sTLT-1 and biomarkers, and investigated the predictive value of sTLT-1 for 30-day prognosis.

Result: Compared with the surviving patients, the patients who died had a lower degree of platelet activation [lower sTLT-1, platelet factor 4 (PF-4) and platelet counts] and a higher degree of burn [higher abbreviated burn severity index score (ABSI score)], shock (higher lactate), endothelial glycocalyx damage [higher syndecan-1 and soluble thrombomodulin (sTM)] and capillary leakage [higher resuscitation fluid (0-48 h), lower albumin] as well as decreased haemostasis [higher activated partial prothrombin time (APTT), lower fibrinogen and thrombin-antithrombin III complex (TAT)], increased fibrinolytic activity [higher D-dimer and tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA)] and decreased natural anticoagulation [lower protein C (PC) and protein S (PS)]. Higher D-dimer (P = 0.013) and lower PF-4 (P = 0.001) were significantly independently associated with lower sTLT-1. Low circulating sTLT-1 (a unit is 50 pg/mL) (odds ratio [OR] 2.08 [95% CI 1.11-3.92], P = 0.022) was an independent predictor of increased 30-day mortality.

Conclusion: Low sTLT-1 levels at 48 h after burn in patients with severe burns is associated with increased coagulation disorders. Low circulating sTLT-1 levels were an independent predictor of increased 30-day mortality.