Background: Longer duration of active pushing during labor is associated with a higher rate of operative delivery and an increased risk of maternal and neonatal complications. Although immediate pushing at complete dilatation is associated with lower rates of chorioamnionitis and postpartum hemorrhage, it is also associated with a longer duration of pushing.

Objective: This study aimed to evaluate whether fetal head station and position, as assessed by ultrasound at the beginning of the pushing process, can predict the mode of delivery and duration of pushing in nulliparous women.

Study design: This prospective observational study included nulliparous women with neuraxial analgesia and complete cervical dilatation. The following sonographic parameters were assessed just before the beginning of the pushing process, at rest, and while pushing during contraction: head position, angle of progression, head-perineum distance, and head-symphysis distance. The change between rest and pushing was designated as delta angle of progression, delta head-perineum distance, and delta head-symphysis distance. The sonographic measurements and fetal head station assessed by vaginal examination were compared between women who had a spontaneous vaginal delivery to those who underwent an operative delivery, and between those who pushed for more or less than 1 hour.

Results: Of the 197 women included in this study, 166 (84.3%) had a spontaneous vaginal delivery, 31 (15.7%) had an operative delivery, 23 (11.6%) had a vacuum delivery, and 8 (4.0%) had a cesarean delivery. Spontaneous vaginal delivery and shorter duration of pushing (less than an hour) were significantly more common with a nonocciput posterior position (10.6% vs 47.3%; P<.005), a wider angle of progression, a shorter head-perineum distance and head-symphysis distance (both during rest and while pushing), and a lower fetal head station as assessed by digital vaginal examination. However, a logistic regression model revealed that only the angle of progression at rest and the delta angle of progression were independently associated with a spontaneous vaginal delivery with an area under the curve of 0.82 (95% confidence interval, 0.76-0.87; P<.0001) and 0.75 (95% confidence interval, 0.67-0.79; P<.0001), respectively.

Conclusion: Ultrasound performed at the beginning of the active second stage of labor can assist in predicting the mode of delivery and duration of pushing and perform better than the traditional digital examination, with the angle of progression at rest and delta angle of progression being the best predictors.

