Objective: To observe the effect of ginger-partitioned moxibustion on digestive tract reaction, quality of life and white blood cell count after chemotherapy in advanced malignant bone tumors patients.

Methods: A total of 64 patients were randomly divided into an observation group and a control group, 32 cases in each group. Both groups were treated with adriamycin combined with cisplatin (AP) chemotherapy. The patients in the control group were treated by tropisetron hydrochloride intravenous on preventing the vomiting 1 h before receiving chemotherapy. On the basis of the control group, the patients in the observation group were treated with ginger-partitioned moxibustion at Neiguan (PC 6), Zusanli (ST 36), Shenque (CV 8), and Zhongwan (CV 12) 2 h after chemotherapy, once a day, 30 min each time. The course of chemotherapy, ginger-partitioned moxibustion and tropisetron hydrochloride intravenous was 5 days. The digestive tract reaction rating, quality of life score and white blood cell count were compared 1 d before chemotherapy, 2 d after chemotherapy and 7 d after chemotherapy between the two groups.

Results: The number of 0 grade in digestive tract reaction 2 d and 7 d after chemotherapy in the observation group was significantly higher than that in the control group (P<0.05), and the number of Ⅲ、Ⅳ grade was lower than that in the control group (P<0.05). The quality of life scores of both groups 2 d after chemotherapy were lower than those before chemotherapy (P<0.05), and there was no significant difference between the two groups (P>0.05). The quality of life score of the control group 7 d after chemotherapy was lower than that before chemotherapy (P<0.05), the quality of life score of the observation group was not statistically different from that before chemotherapy (P>0.05), and the quality of life score in the observation group was higher than that in the control group (P<0.05). The white blood cell count 2 d after chemotherapy in both groups was lower than before treatment (P<0.05), and there was no significant difference between the two groups (P>0.05). Seven days after chemotherapy, the white blood cell count in the control group was lower than that before chemotherapy (P<0.05), while there was no significant difference in the observation group compared with before chemotherapy (P>0.05), and the white blood cell count in the observation group was higher than that in the control group (P<0.05).

Conclusion: Ginger-partitioned moxibustion can prevent and treat vomiting after chemotherapy in advanced malignant bone tumors, and improve the quality of life and white blood cell count of patients.