Purpose: Prior studies indicate high risk of mental health problems among caregivers of adolescents with cerebral palsy although limited consideration is given to caregivers in low- and middle-income countries. This study aimed to compare the burden of depression, anxiety and stress among caregivers of adolescents with cerebral palsy to caregivers of adolescents without disability in rural Bangladesh; and to identify factors unique to low- and middle-income countries that predict caregiver's mental health.

Methods: Observational study comparing caregivers of adolescents with cerebral palsy identified through the Bangladesh Cerebral Palsy Register and caregivers of adolescents without disability from neighboring dwellings. Caregiver mental health was assessed using the Depression, Anxiety and Stress Scale-21, adolescent mental health using the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire and adolescent health-related quality of life using Kidscreen-27. Hierarchical multivariable regression analysis was performed.

Results: Participants were 154 caregivers of adolescents with cerebral palsy and 173 caregivers of adolescents without disability, matched on adolescent age and sex. Caregivers of adolescents with cerebral palsy reported significantly higher risk of depression and stress than caregivers of adolescents without disability (Effect Size 0.1 to 0.2, p < 0.05) although no difference on anxiety. Caregiver age, adolescent mental health, household overcrowding and adolescent hearing impairment were significant predictors of depression, anxiety and/or stress (0.1 to 2.2, p < 0.05).

Conclusions: Caregivers of adolescents with cerebral palsy in rural Bangladesh are at high risk of depression and stress. Initiatives to improve caregiver mental health are required; we recommend initiatives address adolescent mental health problems and include poverty reduction measures to improve social and economic capital. Improved understanding of the factors predicting caregiver depression, anxiety and stress unique to low and middle-income countries are necessary to guide policies and public health infrastructure development.Implications for rehabilitationCaregivers of adolescents with cerebral palsy in rural Bangladesh are at significantly higher risk of depression and stress than caregivers of adolescents without disability.We recommend interventions to improve caregiver mental health give specific consideration to older caregivers, those whose adolescent report mental health problems, families living in crowded households, and/or whose child has hearing impairment.We recommend interventions include poverty reduction measures to improve social and economic capital and target both caregivers and adolescents with CP to enhance long term outcomes.