Backgroud: Current evidence supports the use of cemented hemiarthroplasty for treatment of intracapsular femoral neck fractures since it is associated with a lower risk of implant-related complications. However, many medical centers employ the cementless technique for the frail elderly population because it is faster and has lower cardiovascular risks and perioperative mortality. This observational study reports the outcomes of cementless bipolar hemiarthroplasty for intracapsular femoral neck fractures in patients aged 80 years and older.

Methods: A total of 424 patients (female, 77.1%) with a mean age of 86.9 years were operated for intracapsular femoral neck fractures between January 2009 and December 2017. Of those, 66.7% had an American Society of Anaesthesiologists (ASA) score of 3 or more. All operations were performed with the posterolateral surgical approach and all patients received a cementless stem. Intraoperative and perioperative values and in-hospital outcomes were evaluated, and clinical and radiographical follow-up was done at 40 days, 90 days, and when possible between 5 months and 12 months postoperatively. Multivariate analysis was performed to evaluate if there were factors affecting mortality.

Results: The mean operative time was 50 minutes. There were no deaths intraoperatively. Intraoperative periprosthetic fractures occurred in 2.1% of the cases with 66.7% of them fixed through cerclage wires intraoperatively. The median length of hospitalization was 11 days (interquartile range, 8.75-15) and 2.4% of patients died while in hospital after surgery. Approximately 91.5% of patients presented with perioperative anemia. Only 1.9% of the complications were related to the implant, 62.5% of which were dislocations. More than 90% of patients were ambulatory either autonomously or with support at each follow-up assessment. Age, male sex, and higher ASA score were related to increased mortality.

Conclusions: Despite some limitations, this observational study underlines that a cementless femoral stem of modern design can give good clinical outcomes, thus being an appropriate solution especially for the frail elderly.