Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) K99 is one of the major pathogens associated with calf diarrhea. The induction of passive immunity in animals by immunoglobulin Y and using probiotics are inexpensive alternatives to antibiotics for the prevention and treatment of a number of bacterial infections, including diarrhea. Hence, the aim of this research was to evaluate the impact of dietary probiotics and ETEC K99-specific egg yolk antibody supplements, alone and in combination with each other, on health and growth parameters, diarrhea incidence and immune stimulation in newborn Holstein calves. One hundred and twenty neonatal calves were allocated randomly into 4 dietary groups (n = 30 per group) received colostrum/milk without any additives (control group), or supplemented with egg yolk powder contained E. coli K99-specific antibody (Ab group; 1 g/day), a commercial probiotic, Hypro-calves (Pro group; 3 g/day), and their combination (Ab+Pro group), from day (d) 1 to d28 of age. Analyses of the growth parameters, feed efficiency, fecal score, and microbiota and immune function were carried out on d0, 14, 21, and 28 of the experiment. Calves in Ab or Ab+Pro group had higher (P < 0.05) average daily gain compared to control and Pro groups during 0-14d. Feed efficiency of calves in Ab and Ab+Pro groups was significantly higher than that in control group during the period of 0-14d; however, no significant differences were observed in 0-28d period. Diarrhea prevalence and fecal score in Ab+Pro group were lower than control group (P < 0.05). Calves in Ab+Pro group had the lowest number of fecal E. coli in comparison to other groups on d28 (P < 0.05). Feeding Ab+Pro supplement increased (P < 0.05) concentrations of blood IgA and serum CD4 compared to the control group. Likewise, calves in Pro group had higher CD4 levels as compared to the control calves (P < 0.05). Serum concentration of interferon-gamma in control group was lower than other groups (P < 0.05). Overall, these data suggest that feeding a combination of probiotic and specific antibody against ETEC to neonate Holstein calves enhances feed efficiency, boosts immunity, and reduces diarrhea prevalence.