Aim and objective: The aim of the study was to compare three different techniques using scalpel, electrosurgery, and laser for gingival depigmentation in terms of pain, discomfort, duration of procedure, wound healing, and repigmentation.

Materials and methods: Thirty patients in the age range of 24-38 years were briefed about the surgical procedure and an informed consent was obtained and they were randomly allocated into three groups of 10 individuals (5 males and 5 females) each: those undergoing depigmentation with scalpel (group I), electrosurgery (group II), and diode lasers (Biolase) (group III). Individuals of all three groups were asked to describe the level of pain and discomfort by using the visual analog scale (VAS) 2 hours, 24 hours, and 1 week postoperatively. Further, the groups were compared based on duration of procedure, wound healing, and repigmentation at the end of 14 months.

Results: All the groups showed a decrease in the pain levels, which was statistically highly significant 1 week postoperatively when compared 24 hours postoperatively. There was a statistically significant difference in the pain levels between the scalpel, electrosurgery, and lasers groups after 24 hours (p < 0.001), with the lasers group demonstrating significantly less pain and discomfort. There was significant difference between the groups with respect to the duration of procedure, with less mean time for completion of the procedure observed for group III. Furthermore, less time for wound healing was observed in group III as compared to other groups. Total 8 out 10 patients in group I, 7 out of 10 patients in group II, and 2 out of 10 patients in group III showed repigmentation at the end of 14 months.

Conclusion: The rising concern for esthetic demand of an individual requires the removal of hyperpigmented gingival areas to create a confident and pleasing smile, which could be easily attained by using laser.

Clinical significance: Laser is an effective and fast tool that causes less pain, discomfort, faster healing, and delayed repigmentation compared with scalpel or electrosurgery for gingival depigmentation.